---
layout: post
comments: true
title: I love Notepad++
category: 
tags: github, markdown, find and replace, jekyll, upgrade, notepad++, shortcuts
year: 2016
month: 6
day: 30
published: true
summary: I love Notepad++.
---

A while back Github Pages upgraded to Jekyll 3.0. As a result, only `kramdown` is supported for Jekyll sites hosted on Github Pages.

Seeing as I didn't pay close attention to what was going on, I spent a while very confused and frustrated trying to figure out why all my MathJax wasn't displaying properly. Once I figured out what the upgrade was doing, I spent some more time confused and frustrated trying to fix the problem.

[This blog post by Toban Wiebe](http://tobanwiebe.com/blog/2016/02/mathjax-kramdown) explained what was going on in words I can grok. Unfortunately, I am one of those people with a lot of old posts to convert.

I've been reading through "[Automate the Boring Stuff with Python](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/)" this summer, so I figured this was a perfect project - write a Python script to convert `redcarpet`-acceptable delimiters like `\\(` and `\\{` to `kramdown`-acceptable delimiters like `$$` and `\{`. I started down that path, and even got as far as figuring out the appropriate regular expressions and writing a first draft of a script.

Then I remembered that [Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/) (my preferred text editor) has a "Replace All in All Opened Documents" function. Like any good myopic optimizer, I stopped writing that script immediately and pulled up Notepad++.

Problem solved. Hooray for Notepad++!

(It seems like MathJax doesn't always load with the page anymore, but a couple refreshes solves the problem. Not sure what's up with that.)